
SCALABILITY

How do I configure StrokeDB for a typical web-app?
Let's investigate different possible confogurations step-by-step 
from simple to advanced ones.


OVERVIEW

1) Consider a single-webserver configuration.
   Your configuration will look like:
    
     app <-> mem_store <-> file_store
   
   In general, each store does not allow concurrent access (except special 
   configuration cases). Thus, you may treat a whole database as a simple 
   single-threaded shared resource with a giant mutex on it.
   It is easy to maintain, error-prone and is reasonably fast
   for relatively small applications.

2) When you go bigger and have multithreaded environment to handle
   multiple simultaneous requests, you have to think about scaling.
   In a regular RDBMS the first thing you do is master-slave replication.
   It is an easiest thing you can do with your database to get better 
   performance (at least, for read-only access). 
   
   In StrokeDB it is amazingly easy to spread your dataset among any number
   of storages, processes and even machines. Scaling that way you don't 
   have to worry about data synchronization latency or collisions.
   Different processes/threads can work with different documents concurrently.
   In case of complex transactions, you may set a distributed lock on some 
   documents. 
   
   If you are building some kind of web-2.0-ish application (store lots of
   user-generated data; serving it for many concurrent clients), automated 
   split-and-distribute is a very good way of scaling, until you meet some
   logical and networking issues.
   
3) Limits of data splitting

   First issue is a algorithmical problem. StrokeDB core operations 
   work with simple data structures, which are easy to split and distribute 
   (skiplists, for example). But when it comes to implement some complex 
   data structure, you have to keep in mind ability to split it. Anyway, you
   may leave it being monolitic, but this won't help you scale well.
   
   Second issue is a problem with networking. When data is distributed on 
   a relatively big cluster it's getting harder to maintain good performance.
   Imagine, you have two datacenters in a different places in the world and
   wish to balance load between them. Half of the users would be served by
   the first cluster, another half — by another cluster. 
   Here replication comes onto the scene.
   
4) Data replication

   (Please read docs/overview/replication.txt before proceeding.)
   
   There're three common use cases:
   1. Backup. You may pull incremental updates from the database 
      to your local machine or a hard drive array. 
      Also, it is possible to do an incremental distributed backup on 
      a production system to achive high availability (automatically 
      switching to secondary copies in case of data loss).
   2. Offline work. StrokeDB provides great facility to enroll
      collaborative tools with asynchronous data access and offline work.
   3. Geographical spread. You may want to store the same data in the two
      distinct datacenters and sync them with a reasonable latency.
      With StrokeDB you may configure a streamed pull with an established
      TCP connection. 
      You should note though, this would be an asynchronous merge, 
      so you have to use an automatic conflict resolution protocol 
      and design your application in such a way to have as little 
      conflicts as possible (and none of them can be fatal).


STORAGES 

We haven't said enough about the actual data representation.
Data serialization is handled by so-called _storages_.

The basic thing storage does is a read/write access to any document
by given UUID and version.

StrokeDB core provides you with some default storages:

  1) MemoryStorage keeps all data in a memory of a working process. 
     It is extremely fast since it does need any encoding/decoding
     operations, but you can't keep many documents in it simultaneously.
     
  2) MemcachedStorage works like memory store, but uses encode/decode
     routines and is able to utilize a shared memory of a whole cluster.
     It has a downside, though. Every document may disappear from the LRU
     buffer (Least Recently Used) at any time, thus it can be used as a 
     read-only storage.

  3) FileStorage keeps data in encoded format on a local hard drive in 
     a particular folder. Looks very much like sqlite, no magic here.

  4) NetworkStorage is not a storage, actually, but an interface for
     a variety of data access protocols and physical storages.
     From a client point of view, NetworkStorage is a consistent storage,
     just like FileStorage is. But inside it very interesting things can 
     be implemented. For example, automatic sharding, asynchronous pulls,
     custom merge strategies etc.


CHAINS OF STORAGES

There's a notion of "chains of storages". It is an extremely easy way
to configure storages for the best performance and availability.

A trivial example.

You have some web-app sitting on a single server. Very simple configuration
is to use a FileStorage, so that every read() and write() 
happens on a hard drive.

Eventually, you may find that it is not very fast solution to access HDD every
time you want to read the same data. Also, there is a performance loss
on repeatedly encode/decode calls.

In a RDBMS world you may use caching (either in the DB engine, or in your app),
StrokeDB suggests a better solution: 
You put MemoryStorage and FileStorage in a _chain_, so that 
FileStorage pulls updates from MemoryStorage when needed (you may do it 
asynchronuously, or on each save).

You may use MemoryStorage instances as a sandboxes for transactions:
when a complex transaction is evaluated in a isolated storage, it can be
merged to another storage atomically.

For large-scale databases there can be a big chain of MemcachedStorages and 
FileStorages coupled with some networking interfaces.

You may easily build a storage chain of Memcached, local hard drives, Amazon S3
just like ThruDB suggests. 

 


